APM-665 - overview of memory usage and options (#1425)
arangodb/docs: 3.11/administration-reduce-memory-footprint.md

Overview over RAM usage in ArangoDB
-----------------------------------

This section explains the various areas which use RAM and what they are
for.

Broadly, ArangoDB uses significant amounts of RAM for the following subsystems:

- storage engine including the block cache
- HTTP server and queues
- edge caches and other caches
- AQL queries
- V8 (JavaScript features)
- ArangoSearch
- AgencyCache/ClusterInfo (cluster meta data)
- cluster-internal replication

Of these, the storage engine itself has some subsystems which contribute
towards its memory usage:

- RocksDB block cache
- data structures to read data (Bloom filters, index blocks, table readers)
- data structures to write data (write buffers, transaction data)
- RocksDB background compaction

It is important to understand that all these have a high impact on
performance. For example, the block cache is there such that already
used blocks can be retained in RAM for later access. The larger the
cache, the more blocks can be retained and so the higher the probability
that a subsequent access does not need to reach out to disk and thus
incurs no additional costs on performance and IO capacity.

> RocksDB caches bloom filters and index blocks of its SST files in RAM.

Reviewer: As this is controled via configuration, I would make this conditional:
```suggestion
RocksDB can cache bloom filters and index blocks of its SST files in RAM.
```

this can easily slow down random accesses by a factor of 10 to 100,
since suddenly many disk reads are needed to find a single
RocksDB key!

Other data structures for reading (table readers) and writing (write
batches and write buffers) are also needed for smooth operation. If one
cuts down on these too harshly, reads can be slowed down considerably
and writes can be delayed. The latter can lead to overall slowdowns and
could even end up in total write stalls and stops until enough write
buffers have been written out to disk.

Since RocksDB is a log structured merge tree (LSM), there must be
background threads to perform compactions. They merge different SST
files and throw out old, no-longer used data. These compaction
operations also need considerable amounts of RAM. If this is limited too
much (by reducing the number of concurrent compaction operations), then
a compaction debt can occur, which also results in write stalls or
stops.

The other subsystems outside the storage engine also need RAM. If an
ArangoDB server queues up too many requests (for example, if more
requests arrive per time than can be executed), then the bodies of these

> requests are cached in RAM.

Author: Done.

Furthermore, there are multiple different caches which are sitting in
front of the storage engine, the most prominent one being the edge cache
which helps to speed up graph traversals. The larger these caches,

> the more data can be cached and the higher the likelyhood that data

Author: Done.

its total size can lead to the fact that write buffers are flushed
earlier to make older WAL files obsolete. Therefore, adjusting the
option

```
--rocksdb.max-total-wal-size
```

to some value smaller than its default of 80MB can potentially help
to reduce RAM usage. However, the effect is rather indirect.

Write Buffers
-------------

RocksDB writes into
[memory buffers mapped to on-disk blocks](https://github.com/facebook/rocksdb/wiki/Write-Buffer-Manager)
first. At some point, the memory buffers will be full and have to be
flushed to disk. In order to support high write loads, RocksDB might
open a lot of these memory buffers.

By default, the system may use up to 10 write buffers per column family
and the default write buffer size is 64MB. Since normal write loads will
only hit the documents, edge, primary index and vpack index column
families, this effectively limits the RAM usage to something like 2.5GB.
However, there is a global limit which works across column families,
which can be used to limit the total amount of memory for write buffers
(set to unlimited by default!):

```
--rocksdb.total-write-buffer-size
```

> Note that it does not make sense to set to set this limit smaller than

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that it does not make sense to set this limit smaller than
```

Author: Done.

The block cache basically trades increased RAM usage for less disk I/O, so its
size does not only affect memory usage, but can also affect read performance.

See also:
- [RocksDB Server Options](programs-arangod-options.html#rocksdb)
- [Write Buffer Manager](https://github.com/facebook/rocksdb/wiki/Write-Buffer-Manager){:target="_blank"}

Transactions
------------

Before commit, RocksDB builds up transaction data in RAM. This happens
in so-called "table builders". When there are many or large open
transactions, this can sum up to a large amount of RAM usage.

As mentioned above in the block cache section, RAM usage for table
builders can be accounted for with the block cache, if
`--rocksdb.reserve-table-builder-memory` is set to `true`.

A further limit on RAM usage can be imposed by setting the option

```
--rocksdb.max-transaction-size
```

which is by default unlimited. This setting limits the total size of
a single RocksDB transaction. If the table builder exceeds this size,
the transaction is automatically aborted. Note that this cannot guard
against **many** simultaneously uncommitted transactions.

Another way to limit actual transaction size is "intermediate commits".

> This is a setting which leads to the behaviour that ArangoDB will

Author: Done.

> automatically commit large transactions during their execution. This of

Author: Done.

Index Caches
------------

There are in-RAM caches for edge indexes and other indexes. The total
RAM limit for them can be configured with this option:

```
--cache.size
```

By default, this is set to 25% of (R - 2GB) where R is the total
detected available RAM (or 256MB if that total is at most 4GB).
You can disable the in-memory index
[caches](programs-arangod-options.html#cache), by setting the limit to 0.

If you do not have a graph use case and do not use edge collections,
nor the optional hash cache for persistent indexes, it is possible to
use no cache (or a minimal cache size) without a performance impact. In
general, this should correspond to the size of the hot-set of edges and
cached lookups from persistent indexes.

Another way to save memory in the caches is to use compression by
setting the option

```
--cache.min-value-size-for-edge-compression
```

The default is 1GB which essentially switches the compression off.
If you set this to something like 100, values with at least 100 bytes
will be compressed.

This will cost a little CPU power but the system can then cache more
data in the same amount of memory.

> The behaviour of the hash tables used in the caches can be adjusted with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The behavior of the hash tables used internally by the caches can be adjusted with
```

Author: done.
